documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/road-to-immutability/04-container.adoc, before:

== Containers

=== Definition

Loosely speaking, a container is a type to which you can safely pass on your objects, it will not modify them.
This is the formal rule:

****
*Definition*: a type is a *container* when none of the parameters of the non-private methods and constructors of the type are modifying.
****

Whatever else the container does, storing the parameters in fields or not, it will not change your objects.
You obviously remain free to change them, and the container will keep on holding the changed object, not some copy.

Containers are complementary to immutable objects, and we will find that many immutable objects are containers, while some containers can be modified to become immutable.
There are two archetypes for containers: collections and builders.

The code analyser will annotate a type that is both level 1 immutable, and a container, with `@E1Container`.
This occurs frequently enough to justify a separate annotation.
The simple but useful utility type `Pair` trivially satisfies both requirements:

.A pair of objects
[source,java]
----
@E1Container
public class Pair<K,V> {
    public final K k;
    public final V v;
    public Pair(K k, V v) {
        this.k = k;
        this.v = v;
    }
    public K getK() {
        return k;
    }
    public V getV() {
        return v;
    }
}
----

While it is clearly level 1 immutable, it will remain to be seen if it satisfies all criteria for intuitive immutability.
However, it is easily recognized as a container: a type you use and trust to hold objects.

Containers occur frequently as static sub-types to build immutable objects.
Examples of these will follow later, after the definition of level 2 immutability.

Let us conclude this section with an example consisting of three types: the first a class computed to be a container, the second a container according to the contract, and the third a class which cannot be a container:

[source,java]
----
@Container
class ErrorMessage {
    private String message;

    public ErrorMessage(String message) {
        this.message = message;
    }

    @NotModified
    public String getMessage() {
        return message;
    }

    @Modified
    public void setMessage(String message) {
        this.message = message;
    }
}

@Container
interface ErrorRegistry {
    @NotModified
    List<ErrorMessage> getErrors();

    @Modified
    void addError(@NotModified ErrorMessage errorMessage); // <1>
}

class BinaryExpression extends Expression {
    public final Expression lhs;
    public final Expression rhs;

    // ...

    public void evaluate(@Modified ErrorRegistry errorRegistry) {
        // ...
        if(lhs instanceof NullConstant || rhs instanceof NullConstant) {
            errorRegistry.addError(new ErrorMessage(...));
        }
        // ...
    }
}
----
<1> Implementations of `ErrorRegistry` will not be allowed to use the `setMessage` setter in `addError`.

The `BinaryExpression` is not a container, because it uses one of the parameters of its methods, `errorRegistry`, as a writable container.

[#functional-types-2]
=== Functional types, part 2

The `Collection` interface as depicted in <<collection-interface>> left the `Consumer` parameter of `forEach` unannotated.
We would very much like `Collection` to be a container, it is almost the archetypal example of this concept.

The main rule for containers stipulates that the parameter has to be {nm}, which we cannot know to be the case:
the user can provide us with a single abstract method that modifies its closure, or not.
We propose to change the definition of container slightly:

****
*Definition (updated)*: a type is a *container* when none of the parameters of the non-private methods and constructors of the type, except parameters of a functional type, are modifying,
****

The main argument for going along with this is predictability and control: the container will not modify your objects.
If the implementation of the functional type modifies your objects, well, you were the one providing the container with the means of modification.
You remain in control, and do not need to study the container's code to predict if there will be modifications to the data you sent to the container, or not.

[#linking-and-independence]
== Linking and independence

Let us now elaborate on how we will compute modifications, in a path towards level 2 immutability.
Consider the following example:

.Example 6, field linked to constructor parameter
[source,java]
----
class LinkExample1<X> {
    private final Set<X> set;

    public LinkExample1(Set<X> xs) {
        this.set = xs;
    }

    public void add(X x) {
        set.add(x);
    }
}
----

After construction, an instance of `LinkExample1` contains a reference to the set that was passed as an argument to its constructor.
We say the field `set` links to the parameter `xs` of the constructor.
In this example, this is an expensive way of saying that there is an assignment from one to the other.
However, linking can become more complicated.

The code analyser will add modification annotations as follows:

.Example 7, field linked to constructor parameter, with annotations
[source,java]
----
class LinkExample1<X> {
    @Modified
    private final Set<X> set;

    public LinkExample1(@Modified Set<X> xs) {
        this.set = xs;
    }

    @Modified
    public void add(X x) {
        set.add(x);
    }
}
----

As noted above, the parameter `x` of `WithSet.add` is trivially `@NotModified`  because unbound parameter types have no modifying methods that can be called on them.

Linking looks at the underlying object, and not at the variable.
Consider the following alternative `add` method:

.Example 8, alternative `add` method
[source,java]
----
@Modified
public void add(X x) {
    Set<X> theSet = this.set;
    X theX = x;
    theSet.add(theX);
}
----

Nothing has changed, obviously.

****
Intuitively, linking means that modifying the source object implies that the linked object may be modified too.
Linking does not work on objects that cannot be modified, like primitives or deeply immutable objects such as `java.lang.String`.
****

We will discuss linking more formally later.
For now, assume that a field links to another field, or to a parameter, if there is a possibility that both represent the same object.

The opposite of linking is independence.
While the code analyser will not annotate linking, it will annotate independence with `@Independent` on methods and constructors, and, in one specific case, to parameters.

****
*Definition*: A method returning a real value (not `void`, not `this`) is *independent* when the object returned does not link to any of the fields of the type.
****

The definition for independence on a constructor is very similar:

****
*Definition*: A constructor is *independent* when the fields of the resulting instance do not link to the parameters of the constructor.
****

Finally, we provide a definition to deal with parameters of functional type.
Note that in frameworks like link:vertx.io, such parameters are the default means of 'returning' or propagating values.

****
*Definition*: if a method has parameters of functional type, then it is *independent* when the objects linking to the arguments of the single abstract method do not link to the fields of the class or other parameters of the method.
****

It follows immediately that:

* empty constructors of top-level types and static sub-types (but not necessarily inner classes, sub types-that are not static) are always independent
* methods that return primitives or deeply immutable objects are independent, since these objects cannot be modified

Examples follow soon, once immutability has been defined in more detail.

// ensure a newline at the end

Commit message:

have all ducks in a row, will start reorganizing manual now

documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/road-to-immutability/04-container.adoc, after:

== Containers

=== Definition

Loosely speaking, a container is a type to which you can safely pass on your objects, it will not modify them.
This is the formal rule:

****
*Definition*: a type is a *container* when none of the parameters of the non-private methods and constructors of the type are modifying.
****

Whatever else the container does, storing the parameters in fields or not, it will not change your objects.
You obviously remain free to change them, and the container will keep on holding the changed object, not some copy.

Containers are complementary to immutable objects, and we will find that many immutable objects are containers, while some containers can be modified to become immutable.
There are two archetypes for containers: collections and builders.

The code analyser will annotate a type that is both level 1 immutable, and a container, with `@E1Container`.
This occurs frequently enough to justify a separate annotation.
The simple but useful utility type `Pair` trivially satisfies both requirements:

.A pair of objects
[source,java]
----
@E1Container
public class Pair<K,V> {
    public final K k;
    public final V v;
    public Pair(K k, V v) {
        this.k = k;
        this.v = v;
    }
    public K getK() {
        return k;
    }
    public V getV() {
        return v;
    }
}
----

While it is clearly level 1 immutable, it will remain to be seen if it satisfies all criteria for intuitive immutability.
However, it is easily recognized as a container: a type you use and trust to hold objects.

Containers occur frequently as static sub-types to build immutable objects.
Examples of these will follow later, after the definition of level 2 immutability.

Let us conclude this section with an example consisting of three types: the first a class computed to be a container, the second a container according to the contract, and the third a class which cannot be a container:

[source,java]
----
@Container
class ErrorMessage {
    private String message;

    public ErrorMessage(String message) {
        this.message = message;
    }

    @NotModified
    public String getMessage() {
        return message;
    }

    @Modified
    public void setMessage(String message) {
        this.message = message;
    }
}

@Container
interface ErrorRegistry {
    @NotModified
    List<ErrorMessage> getErrors();

    @Modified
    void addError(@NotModified ErrorMessage errorMessage); // <1>
}

class BinaryExpression extends Expression {
    public final Expression lhs;
    public final Expression rhs;

    // ...

    public void evaluate(@Modified ErrorRegistry errorRegistry) {
        // ...
        if(lhs instanceof NullConstant || rhs instanceof NullConstant) {
            errorRegistry.addError(new ErrorMessage(...));
        }
        // ...
    }
}
----
<1> Implementations of `ErrorRegistry` will not be allowed to use the `setMessage` setter in `addError`.

The `BinaryExpression` is not a container, because it uses one of the parameters of its methods, `errorRegistry`, as a writable container.

[#functional-types-2]
=== Functional types, part 2

The `Collection` interface as depicted in <<collection-interface>> left the `Consumer` parameter of `forEach` unannotated.
We would very much like `Collection` to be a container, it is almost the archetypal example of this concept.

The main rule for containers stipulates that the parameter has to be {nm}, which we cannot know to be the case:
the user can provide us with a single abstract method that modifies its closure, or not.

We consider the object that the container must not change to be the return value of functional type, if it has one.

****
*Definition*: a parameter of functional type is {nm} when the method of the parameter does not modify the result of applying the function.
****

In the case of `forEach`, the functional type is a `Consumer`, which has no result.
It therefore automatically satisfies the condition.

A more meaningful situation is when the functional type is a `Supplier`, which does return a value.
We present an example of this situation in <<example-lazy>>.

[#linking-and-independence]
== Linking, dependence and exposure

Let us now elaborate on how we will compute modifications, in a path towards level 2 immutability.
Consider the following example:

.Example 6, field linked to constructor parameter
[source,java]
----
class LinkExample1<X> {
    private final Set<X> set;

    public LinkExample1(Set<X> xs) {
        this.set = xs;
    }

    public void add(X x) {
        set.add(x);
    }
}
----

After construction, an instance of `LinkExample1` contains a reference to the set that was passed as an argument to its constructor.
We say the field `set` links to the parameter `xs` of the constructor.
In this example, this is an expensive way of saying that there is an assignment from one to the other.
However, linking can become more complicated.

The code analyser will add modification annotations as follows:

.Example 7, field linked to constructor parameter, with annotations
[source,java]
----
class LinkExample1<X> {
    @Modified
    private final Set<X> set;

    public LinkExample1(@Modified Set<X> xs) {
        this.set = xs;
    }

    @Modified
    public void add(X x) {
        set.add(x);
    }
}
----

As noted above, the parameter `x` of `WithSet.add` is trivially `@NotModified`  because unbound parameter types have no modifying methods that can be called on them.

Linking looks at the underlying object, and not at the variable.
Consider the following alternative `add` method:

.Example 8, alternative `add` method
[source,java]
----
@Modified
public void add(X x) {
    Set<X> theSet = this.set;
    X theX = x;
    theSet.add(theX);
}
----

Nothing has changed, obviously.

****
Intuitively, linking means that modifying the source object implies that the linked object may be modified too.
Linking does not work on objects that cannot be modified, like primitives or deeply immutable objects such as `java.lang.String`.
****

We will discuss linking more formally later.
For now, assume that a field links to another field, or to a parameter, if there is a possibility that both represent the same object.

The opposite of linking is independence.
While the code analyser will not annotate linking, it will annotate independence with `@Independent` on methods and constructors, and, in one specific case, to parameters.

****
*Definition*: A method returning a real value (not `void`, not `this`) is *independent* when the object returned does not link to any of the fields of the type.
****

The definition for independence on a constructor is very similar:

****
*Definition*: A constructor is *independent* when the fields of the resulting instance do not link to the parameters of the constructor.
****

Finally, we provide a definition to deal with parameters of functional type.
Note that in frameworks like link:vertx.io, such parameters are the default means of 'returning' or propagating values.

****
*Definition*: if a method has parameters of functional type, then it is *independent* when the objects linking to the arguments of the single abstract method do not link to the fields of the class or other parameters of the method.
****

It follows immediately that:

* empty constructors of top-level types and static sub-types (but not necessarily inner classes, sub types-that are not static) are always independent
* methods that return primitives or deeply immutable objects are independent, since these objects cannot be modified

Examples follow soon, once immutability has been defined in more detail.

// ensure a newline at the end
