documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/road-to-immutability/066-linking-formally.adoc, before:

[#linking-exposed]
== Linking and Exposed

=== Linking

To compute linking, the analyser tries to track actual objects, with the aim of knowing if a field links to another field or a parameter.
It computes a dependency graph of variables depending on other variables, with the following three basic rules:

****
Rule 1: in an assignment `v = w`, variable `v` links to variable `w`.
****

****
Rule 2: in an assignment `v = a.method(b, c)`, the default rule is that variable `v` links to `a`, `b` and `c`.
****

We discern a number of special cases:

. When `v` is of primitive or {e2immutable} type, there cannot be any linking; `v` is independent of `a`, `b` and `c`.
. When `method` has the annotation {independent}, `v` is by definition of the annotation independent of `a`, `b` and `c`.
. If `a` is of {e2immutable} type, `v` is independent of `a`: it only links to `b` and `c`.
. In the case of `method` marked {identity} (defined in <<identity-and-fluent>> as a method which returns its first parameter),
`v` links to the first parameter `b` only.

Note that when `a == this`, as in `v = method(b, c)`, `v` could link to any field in the type.
Therefore, unless any of the rules above apply, we will link `v` to `this`.
This is the main reason that {e2immu} analyser insists on marking a method `static` when it does not touch any fields.

****
Rule 3: in an assignment `v = new A(b, c)`, the rules are very similar to that of a normal method call.
By default, `v` links to `b` and `c`.
****

We observe that:

. If `A` is {e2immutable}, then `v` is independent of `b` and `c`.
. The same holds when the constructor `A` is independent: `v` becomes independent of `b` and `c`.

Most of the other rules are consequences of the basic rules above.
For example,

. in an assignment `v = condition ? a : b`, `v` links to both `a` and `b`.
. type casting does not prevent linking: in `v = (Type)w`, `v` links to `w`
. Binary operators return primitives or `java.lang.String`, which prevents linking: in `v = a + b`, `v` does not link to `a` nor `b`.

=== Loop statement

In the loop statement `for(T t: ts)`, does the loop variable `t` link to the source `ts`?
This becomes visible when one considers a model implementation for this statement:

[source,java]
----
Iterator<T> iterator = ts.iterator();
while(iterator.hasNext()) {
    T t = iterator.next();
    { ... }
}
----

When `ts` is of level 2 immutable type, the `Iterator` implementation returned will be independent.
This prevents linking `iterator` to `ts`, and therefore `t` to `ts`.
Independence of the iterator is important for the semantics of the loop: it ensures that the act of looping over the elements does not change the type.
It therefore seems prudent to enforce independence in the interface:

[source,java]
----
interface Iterable<T> {
    @Independent
    Iterator<T> iterator();
}
----

Note that {nm} is not strong enough: not only should the act of creating an iterator not be modifying, applying the `next` and `hasNext` methods should not affect the fields of of the type either.
Concluding the discussion: we could imagine situations where `t` links to `ts`, but we will actively prevent them from happening, and program in a world where the loop variable does not link to its collection.

=== Directionality

A short note on directionality.
The definitions posited above appear directed: `v` links to `a`, `b` and `c`.
This means the object held by `v` may contain (parts of) the object represented by `a`, `b` or `c`.
Modifications to `v` may imply modifications to either `a`, `b`, or `c`; conversely, any modification to `a`, `b` or `c`
may have an impact on `v`.
The connected sub-graph `v`, `a`, `b`, `c` therefore forms one 'equivalence class' with respect to modification.

This equivalence is in line with fields linking to parameters, and vice versa, with identical effect: modifications in one can also take place in the other.

[source,java]
----
public SetBasedContainer(Set<T> ts) {
    this.data = ts; // <1>
}

public void unsafeVisit(Consumer<Set<T>> consumer) {
    consumer.accept(data); // <2>
}
----
<1> from the parameter to the field,
<2> from the field to the parameter.

=== Exposed

Finally, we detail how the analyser computes the {exposed} annotation.
The analysis of the loop statement shows that the definitions of linking do not apply: in `for(T t: ts) { ... }`, the analyser needs to know that `t` is part of the object graph of `ts` in case `ts` is a field.

Commit message:

SetOnceMap now OK, improved independence computation and documentation

documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/road-to-immutability/066-linking-formally.adoc, after:

[#linking-exposed]
== Linking and Exposed

=== Linking

To compute linking, the analyser tries to track actual objects, with the aim of knowing if a field links to another field or a parameter.
It computes a dependency graph of variables depending on other variables, with the following three basic rules:

****
Rule 1: in an assignment `v = w`, variable `v` links to variable `w`.
****

****
Rule 2: in an assignment `v = a.method(b)`,`v` potentially links to `a` and `b`.
****

Note that saying `v` links to `a` is the same as saying that the return value of `method` links to some field inside `A`, the type of `a`.
This is especially clear when `a == this`.

We discern a number of special cases:

. When `v` is of primitive or {e2immutable} type, there cannot be any linking; `v` does not link to `a` nor `b`.
. If `b` is of primitive or {e2immutable} type, `v` cannot link to `b`.
. When `method` has the annotation {independent}, `v` cannot link to `a`.
. If `a` is of {e2immutable} type, all its methods are independent; therefore, `v` cannot link to `a`.

It is important to note that the analyser only computes independence for non-modifying methods, and that all methods returning non-support-data types are automatically independent.

****
Rule 3: in an assignment `v = new A(b)`, `v` potentially links to `b`.
****

Noting that independence is automatic for non-support-data types, we observe:

. When the constructor `A` is independent, `v` cannot link to `b`.
. When `b` is of primitive or {e2immutable} type, `v` cannot link to `b`.
. If `A` is {e2immutable}, then `v` cannot link to `b` nor `c`, because all constructors are independent.

Most of the other linking computations are consequences of the basic rules above.
For example,

. in an assignment `v = condition ? a : b`, `v` links to both `a` and `b`.
. type casting does not prevent linking: in `v = (Type)w`, `v` links to `w`
. Binary operators return primitives or `java.lang.String`, which prevents linking: in `v = a + b`, `v` does not link to `a` nor `b`.

=== Loop statement

In the loop statement `for(T t: ts)`, does the loop variable `t` link to the source `ts`?
This becomes visible when one considers a model implementation for this statement:

[source,java]
----
Iterator<T> iterator = ts.iterator();
while(iterator.hasNext()) {
    T t = iterator.next();
    { ... }
}
----

When `ts` is of level 2 immutable type, the `Iterator` implementation returned will be independent.
This prevents linking `iterator` to `ts`, and therefore `t` to `ts`.
Independence of the iterator is important for the semantics of the loop: it ensures that the act of looping over the elements does not change the type.
It therefore seems prudent to enforce independence in the interface:

[source,java]
----
interface Iterable<T> {
    @Independent
    Iterator<T> iterator();
}
----

Note that {nm} is not strong enough: not only should the act of creating an iterator not be modifying, applying the `next` and `hasNext` methods should not affect the fields of of the type either.
Concluding the discussion: we could imagine situations where `t` links to `ts`, but we will actively prevent them from happening, and program in a world where the loop variable does not link to its collection.

=== Directionality

A short note on directionality.
The definitions posited above appear directed: `v` links to `a`, `b` and `c`.
This means the object held by `v` may contain (parts of) the object represented by `a`, `b` or `c`.
Modifications to `v` may imply modifications to either `a`, `b`, or `c`; conversely, any modification to `a`, `b` or `c`
may have an impact on `v`.
The connected sub-graph `v`, `a`, `b`, `c` therefore forms one 'equivalence class' with respect to modification.

This equivalence is in line with fields linking to parameters, and vice versa, with identical effect: modifications in one can also take place in the other.

[source,java]
----
public SetBasedContainer(Set<T> ts) {
    this.data = ts; // <1>
}

public void unsafeVisit(Consumer<Set<T>> consumer) {
    consumer.accept(data); // <2>
}
----
<1> from the parameter to the field,
<2> from the field to the parameter.

=== Exposed

Finally, we detail how the analyser computes the {exposed} annotation.
The analysis of the loop statement shows that the definitions of linking do not apply: in `for(T t: ts) { ... }`, the analyser needs to know that `t` is part of the object graph of `ts` in case `ts` is a field.
