documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/manual/000-main.adoc, before:

= Effective and eventual immutability
:source-highlighter: coderay
:source-language: java
:description: Annotations and a code analyser in Java to support immutability
:author: Bart Naudts
:sectnums:
:icons: font
:toc: left
:imagesdir: {includedir}/images

:e2immu: pass:normal[_e2immu_]
:intellij: pass:normal[IntelliJ IDEA]

:nn: pass:normal[`@NotNull1`]
:nn1: pass:normal[`@NotNull1`]
:nn2: pass:normal[`@NotNull2`]
:nm: pass:normal[`@NotModified`]
:e2immutable: pass:normal[`@E1Immutable`]
:e2immutable: pass:normal[`@E2Immutable`]
:container:  pass:normal[`@Container`]

include::{includedir}/manual/010-intro.adoc[]

:sectnums!:
== _Using e2immu_
:sectnums:
include::{includedir}/manual/020-install.adoc[]

include::{includedir}/manual/030-use.adoc[]

:sectnums!:
== _Reference_
:sectnums:

include::{includedir}/manual/060-reference.adoc[]

:sectnums!:
== _Technical_
:sectnums:

include::{includedir}/manual/070-technical.adoc[]


include::{includedir}/manual/077-kvstore.adoc[]


:sectnums!:
== _Where next?_
:sectnums:

include::{includedir}/manual/090-wherenext.adoc[]

== Copyright and License

Copyright (C) 2020, Bart Naudts

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

Commit message:

in middle of new ideas for the highlighter plugin

documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/manual/000-main.adoc, after:

= Effective and eventual immutability
:source-highlighter: coderay
:source-language: java
:description: Annotations and a code analyser in Java to support immutability
:author: Bart Naudts
:sectnums:
:icons: font
:toc: left
:imagesdir: {includedir}/images

:e2immu: pass:normal[_e2immu_]
:intellij: pass:normal[IntelliJ IDEA]

:nn: pass:normal[`@NotNull1`]
:nn1: pass:normal[`@NotNull1`]
:nn2: pass:normal[`@NotNull2`]
:nm: pass:normal[`@NotModified`]
:e1immutable: pass:normal[ `@E1Immutable` ]

:e2immutable: pass:normal[ `@E2Immutable` ]
:e2container: pass:normal[ `@E2Container` ]
:container:  pass:normal[ `@Container` ]
:e1immutable: pass:normal[ `@E1Immutable` ]
:e1container: pass:normal[ `@E1Container` ]
:final:  pass:normal[ `@Final` ]
:variable:  pass:normal[ `@Variable` ]
:independent:  pass:normal[ `@Independent` ]
:dependent:  pass:normal[`@Dependent`]
:modified:  pass:normal[`@Modified`]
:mutable: pass:normal[`@Mutable`]
:modifiesArguments: pass:normal[`@ModifiesArguments`]
:supportData: pass:normal[`@SupportData`]


include::{includedir}/manual/010-intro.adoc[]

:sectnums!:

== _Using e2immu_
:sectnums:
include::{includedir}/manual/020-install.adoc[]

include::{includedir}/manual/030-use.adoc[]

:sectnums!:

== _Reference_
:sectnums:

include::{includedir}/manual/060-reference.adoc[]

:sectnums!:

== _Technical_
:sectnums:

include::{includedir}/manual/070-technical.adoc[]

== Supporting tools

include::{includedir}/manual/076-gradle-plugin.adoc[]

include::{includedir}/manual/077-kvstore.adoc[]

include::{includedir}/manual/078-intellij-plugin.adoc[]


:sectnums!:

== _Where next?_
:sectnums:

include::{includedir}/manual/090-wherenext.adoc[]

== Copyright and License

Copyright (C) 2020, Bart Naudts

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
