documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/manual/061-list.adoc, before:

=== List of annotations

==== @NotModified

==== @NotModified1

The {nm1} annotation exists for functional types only (types which implement `java.lang.@FunctionalInterface`).
It indicates that a particular concrete instantiation of the single abstract method of the interface does not modify its arguments or any other variable in its closure.
We understand modification here as either applying a modifying method, or doing an assignment to some field.

This annotation is a dynamic type annotation on functional types in fields, methods and parameters.
The analyser can compute it in certain circumstances; in other cases, the user can show intent by requesting this property.

Note that because suppliers have no parameters, only modifications to the closure apply.
Functional interfaces are always normally {nm}: there are no modifying methods on them apart from the abstract method.

==== @SupportData

The analyser marks a field as {supportData} only when

. the type declaring the field is {e1immutable}, and
. the field classifies as support data, and
. it is {nm}, and
. at least one of {e2immutable}'s rule 2 and rule 3 is not satisfied in relation to this field.

The annotation is present to highlight the fields burdened with extra restrictions to for the type to reach {e2immutable} status.

Commit message:

working on linking and functional types; stuck in a definition

documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/manual/061-list.adoc, after:

=== List of annotations

==== @Identity

Note that {identity} has an effect on linking of variables: a method marked {identity} only links to the first parameter.

==== @NotModified

==== @NotModified1

The {nm1} annotation exists for functional types only (types which implement `java.lang.@FunctionalInterface`).
It indicates that a particular concrete instantiation of the single abstract method of the interface does not modify its arguments or any other variable in its closure.
We understand modification here as either applying a modifying method, or doing an assignment to some field.

This annotation is a dynamic type annotation on functional types in fields, methods and parameters.
The analyser can compute it in certain circumstances; in other cases, the user can show intent by requesting this property.

Note that because suppliers have no parameters, only modifications to the closure apply.
Functional interfaces are always normally {nm}: there are no modifying methods on them apart from the abstract method.

==== @SupportData

The analyser marks a field as {supportData} only when

. the type declaring the field is {e1immutable}, and
. the field classifies as support data, and
. it is {nm}, and
. at least one of {e2immutable}'s rule 2 and rule 3 is not satisfied in relation to this field.

The annotation is present to highlight the fields burdened with extra restrictions to for the type to reach {e2immutable} status.
